---
title: Running list of things to focus on
category: personal
layout: post
---

#### Urgent, unimportant (Tasks)

1.  Call landlord.  Fridge lost its seal some, blinds fell, light in hallway burnt out, sink drips and is annoying.
2.  Get recent list of purchases in Mint.
3.  Confirm dates with Rick, work out contract.
4.  Dry clean winter stuff.
5.  Get running socks, vitamin, sunblock from DR.
6.  Lunch with Anna L.
7.  Tix for Riverside Orchestra next week.
9.  Find a date that works with Rebecca.
10. Grocery shopping for oatmeal, bananas, cinnamon.
11. Want to write brief journal entry on the topic of making sure I'm still building discipline in nutrition, fitness


#### Urgent, important (Near-term tasks & projects)

1.  Improve blog.  These "personal" items should be less in sight.  Probably time to just make Wordpress happen. Need for private entries.
2.  Personal docs in order.

#### Not urgent, somewhat important (Medium-term tasks & projects)

1.  Need to see Gatsby, with who when.
2.  Shopping - short sleeve & lighter colored shirts.
3.  Expand technologically - Ruby, Scala, find good way to learn front end, etc.
4.  Learn to read a Java class file.
5.  Donate blood.

#### Not urgent, not important

1.  Make time to progress on piano.
1.  Board game night with uptown friends?
2.  Board game night at own place, haven't done that yet.
3.  Haven't gone out with Zev in a bit.
4.  Try to get Lucretia, Jessica, Jessica's friend together for a dinner.  Maybe we can figure out where Lucretia gets her Valley Girl accent.
7.  I've been wanting to call Emily W.
