---
title: Journal & Plan, 6/16
layout: post
category: tasks
status: completed
visibility: personal
---

#### Goals for week

1.  Consistently wake up early.  Earlier than I need to.  Get back in this habit.  On time for Rick.
2.  Finances are still messed up a little bit. Figure out what to do about money in savings. Hopefully get something out of PS. ~~Pay Rick.~~
3.  Do cleanings, I will not stop telling you this.
4.  Spend well. Spend nearly perfectly. No un-pleasures. Get value of not spending on un-pleasures.
5.  Find exercise that works.  Leave time in day devoted to it. Stop making wrong trade-offs.
6.  Cook consistently.

I think your downtime just needs to happen in morning...

#### ~~Sometime over the week~~
1.  ~~Pay CFT~~
3.  ~~Lucretia -> Citizen Cope~~
4.  ~~Plan next weekend (Monroe)~~
5. ~~Time on PROMYS~~
6.  ~~Run with Mitha - Monday? Thursday?~~


#### ~~Sunday~~

1.  ~~Need to cook.~~
2.  ~~Need to run with Mitha.~~
3.  ~~See Linda?~~

#### ~~Monday~~

2.  ~~Cook or shopping in night, probably figure out veg. recipe~~
3.  ~~Clean kitchen~~
4.  ~~Clean bathroom~~
5.  ~~Exercise~~
6.  ~~Drop off some laundry (e.g. sheets)~~
7.  ~~Ideally pick up all the laundry too~~
8.  ~~Grind coffee~~

#### Urgent, important

1. Verizon or something - get screen protector
1. ~~Citizen Cope w/ Lucretia~~
2. Mom postcard

#### Non-urgent, important

1. ~~Sign up for a half-marathon~~ [this is on hold for nutrition advancements.]
2. ~~Figure out PocketSmith~~
3. Eye doctor plan
4. Teeth clean plan


#### Non-urgent, unimportant

1. ~~Replace Everyman bag~~
2. Shopping - sunglasses
3. Shopping - short sleeves
4. Replace loafers
5. ~~Replace ant traps~~
6. ~~Haircut - possibly just Mike~~


#### Start thinking about

1.  ~~Get money thrown into CD, Betterment, retirement. Somehow inaccessible.~~
2.  Move forward with Ruby.
3.  Write up some of the long-form posts that have been queued.
4.  Shorter posts - anxiety attack, grocery routine, having to grocery shop, "bugs first project management."
5.  Small site enhancements

#### Shows, events, hangouts etc.

1. See that movie with Crystal.
2. Go to magic show with Crystal / Lucretia.
4. Schiff with Linda...  Lucretia, Crystal.
5. Board game night - Leon, Joey, uptown, Columbia
6. Lucretia has some broadway shows she wants to see
7. And I want to see Unlockd
8. Lunch with Kevin. [How else do you want to hang out with him?]
9. Fuerza Bruta still?
10. Superman!

