---
title: Recommitment
layout: post
category: journal
---

It's strange. This was a very depressive winter for me, and I worked at dealing with this conscientiously. Over the months of March, April, May and early June, I was very, very sensitive to the increase in sunlight every day. I found myself saying so many times, "ah, I finally have some DAYLIGHT in my mind that I can work with." It was surprising how many times I felt that.

Then June 4th was something of a turning point. Or, rather, when parsing the narrative of my life in the past few months, it seems the natural choice to call a turning point, a point where the continuity broke. It was a very busy weekend, first, but some things in my work happened that left me realizing, for the first time this year, I was happy with my job. There was too much sunlight. My positive thoughts were racing faster than my ability to digest them and overturn them. I could no longer be sensitive to the amount of sunlight there was or to the increase in it. It simply was now sunny, and that was that.

Instead of my mind reacting and reaching from one fear or scary topic to another, it did the same thing on topics of excitement or new activities or people to spend time with or areas of growth. **But, being too happy is not a good thing.**  This is subtle. Feeling too good is, undoubtedly, preferable to feeling too bad, but, when you take the dot product against what I care about in life right now, they might have more in common than not. None of these boisterous happy thoughts are being internalized into career growth, writing growth, relationship growth, fitness, and so forth. It's kind of in one ear, out the other. And after some period of time, I will be back to depressive thoughts, largely having wasted a happy period that, ideally, should be met with more constructivity.

There was a point somewhere in April where something very interesting happened. All of my demons were at bay - demons meaning, fears, depressive broodings, things like that. I had all of them identified, lined up, addressed and tended to, and in exchange, they oriented me and kept me on path. I found a lot of productivity in achieving some discipline and some thought processes necessary to address them. But now, they've just scattered. I don't feel them, I'm not tantalized by them, but I accidentally don't know where they've gone, and I suspect they will reappear sooner or later.

Being in that somewhat centered state was actually very new to me. I have no real interest in diverging out to the "happy" end of things. Been there, done that. There's not really any growth left for me there, and I'm just not really interested in the kinds of experiences that are one's idolized youth. I'm too in touch with how much tyranny of the should affects my peers and myself, too in touch with what a person looks like at age 30 and 60 to take honest joy in ephemeral pleasures totally divorced from my forward path and my peer groups.

Right now, I'm not fully there, and I'd like to get back there more. So, I'm going to do something similar to a Catholic confession here and write up my sins and aberrations, and recommit. I will stray again and need to recommit again, but, over the course of these cycles, deeper habits are growing in me that are letting this recommitment happen more deftly. I actually think that's about where a 23 year old should be. Just old enough to have been through a few highs and lows and recognize the patterns, and to learn what not to repeat, and to learn what to repeat along with it. So, here is my recommitment.


###My inventory

1.  *I have stayed vegetarian, and I have continued abstaining from alcohol.* These two things are really important, because they prevent the rest of these things from getting more out of hand. I briefly considered that alcohol might be the way to relax tonight, but you know what? I never would have had the chance to write this piece instead, and I think this has more staying power. I'm still somewhat nervous though that I'll forget why I'm not doing that.

2.  Nutrition has been lacking. I do actually challenge myself to understand where my mental health depreciates from putting bad food into me. I think most people miss this connection. But today I had junk food a bit after lunch.

    Firstly, $2.75, vanished. That's enough to start tilting what my weekly and monthly budgets look like. But the moment I stop *caring* about that $2.75, the door is open to care less about a lot more. So, I try to introspect. The snack (okay, it was a cookie, do you know how embarrassing it sounds saying that?) definitely didn't give me a lot of pleasure. Together with late afternoon coffee I felt jittery and unpleasant. It detracted from my enjoyment of a concert, and I've noticed that a lot of my excitement toward books and places and activities and whatnot, has been harder to focus. I tried doing a cleaning (which is, roughly, a form of meditation) and found it hard to focus on that. All of this relates to poor nutrition. So, let's be mindful of that.

    It's important to get value out of *not* snacking poorly.

3.  Spending has been poor. 75% of my non-essential spending is bad for me (I haven't done the math on this, it's just a heuristic). Then, there's another bump I get from austerity and mindfulness in spending habits, that is further good for me. I've seriously considered "illiquidating" my accounts so this gets more haptic and just a hair challenging, and, I might need that so I can retain focus. 

4.  Mornings have been lethargic.  This one is starting to *bother* me.  Yes, I had some difficulty from being sick. For a bit I realized I had some real value from sleeping about 6 hours with 1 hour of meditating, but by now I'm pretty sure I'm just asleep for the ends of my meditation sittings, and then I just want to sleep more. This is one of those points I most closely watch my health - are my mornings swift or do I just want to sleep and sleep and sleep? Meditation more often than not tends to make them brisk and punctual, but lately I've been using them poorly, and it shows.

5.  I have missed Satsanghs. I've had good "excuses" for two weeks (like being sick), but the effects of missing two does show up.  The practice consists of a short prayer that is just reaffirming the purpose of everything I do is spiritual growth and balance. That means something to me, and it is consistent with the feeling of having my demons at bay but not out of sight. When the prayer surprises me, it means I feel out of touch with the practice and like it's time to put more into it. I'm trying to accomplish that a little bit in this post, but without Satsangh or other time with the practice, it's hurting some. I might just plan a day for myself at the New Jersey Ashram soon.

6.  I have not been concerned with evening sittings. These are still hard for me, but it definitely is part of how much I've been slipping. The practice is the best bastion I have against all of this sloppiness.

7.  I have slipped in cooking too much. See nutrition and $$. At least I'm still vegetarian, but I've been less vegan, which is a bad sign.

8.  No exercise. Probably contributing to morning lethargy. Partly due to the cold, but partly just some complacency that I let myself feel when I should have doubled down on discipline.

### My commitments

1.  Tomorrow morning is the most important thing.  I'm going to approach meditation a little differently.  I'm not going to push my alarm to 7:30 like I've done the past couple days. Maybe that was okay with getting over the cold, but it's not okay tomorrow. I'm going to wake up no later than 6:45, and start with going for a very short walk, then meditate with a different mindfulness than I have recently.

That's actually it for now.  Nipping the morning lethargy I think is the only step I need right now.  More can come later, over Saturday and Sunday too.
