---
title: Why veganism? A rant.
category: general
visibility: public
layout: post
---

Veganishism, day 3ish.  More observations of things I am actually giving up eating: macarons at Boise Tea Parlor, ice cream in the summer. So, what do I say when people ask me out to ice cream? I'm vegan, for reasons that are slippery but I feel it's worth practicing anyway, let's argue? Or do I just make up that I'm lactose intolerant or something?

Of course it's hard to articulate why. I'm taking on questions of willpower, exactly how much concern with the fate of the world and its trillions (?) of living organisms, and on and on. Perhaps some people when asked if they want children respond with something like, "I've always wanted to be a dad" or "they're so cute!" or they've never thought of it. But other people see a meaningful question, different threads of life values and philosophical convictions that are best left hypothetical, but suddenly, are not. That's more like what this is like to me - sometimes I know why I'm doing it, sometimes I don't.

The broodier moments go something like realizing exactly how much social food I'm giving up, and asking if this is seriously worth it. Well, not that crisply. Brooding has a logic that writing isn't pervious to, which is why it's hard to capture the feelings one has while brooding. It's more confronting the question, do I really think my values are that extreme, that bleak, that they have to be put to the test with something that is actually hard to explain to all but the most sympathetic ears without sounding flat-out dark? If this was a healthy step, then how did I get to a life program so extreme?

Calorie for calorie I am far more concerned about the fact that on a given day I will eat something like 500-1000 calories of dessert. And I know the theory behind this. I've felt it. The days my knowledge-job becomes more intense are the days I will have absolutely no energy to say no. And this isn't even conjectural, this is proven, proven, proven. Intellectual ability and willpower are coming from a finite resource that is conserved. We know this, I know this. And my main tool to break this has been more thought and more brooding, which is, of course, more fuel on the fire, and might I add, personally devastating. I have invested so much effort into eating and being healthier and building discipline that has never instantiated into discipline, but merely guilt, and left so little energy for my thoughts to be where they need to be: coding, writing, exercising, waking up a little earlier, meditating. And, the only response to this is - more fuel on the fire, more of the same.

So why veganism? Is that really the healthiest thing for me? Well, if I want to get this health thing down, I have to step out of the health question entirely. I know this. I know the reason is going to have to come somewhere else, because a few weeks or a few months of health is nothing more than a lot of the same decision having to be made over and over again. And I'd like to move on at some point, with a commitment and a decision that is done and made, not one that can be failed at every day.

Maybe the minority decisions where I can't go out to ice cream or get macarons at the tea place are a casualty. Maybe they're my insulation or investment. And in my more brooding moments, I tend to focus on this, the incredible minority of my remaining animal-calories. And the truth is, I don't see this going well. It's going to hurt a little bit when I pass up meat and dairy-intensive outings or go home a little early since I'm the delightful balance of picky and wishy-washy to the point of being stubborn difficult, and people like me with blurry boundaries tend to be the worst at this. So, I'm going to ruin someone's hang-out at some point, lower someone's opinion of me because not only am I a nutty vegan, but also someone quite poor at carrying it, get baited into an argument on *my* personal beliefs and not be astute enough to catch the hypocrisy in "man, you vegetarians always try to shove your beliefs on everyone," but, you know what? I fucking *want* this. I've been observing the fact that as of today I can't ever really think of myself as an undisciplined person again. That is done. That is over. That is finished. When I was born, I was allocated a certain number of donuts I had to eat. The last one was a vanilla cream one from Tim Horton's. I had been putting that one off for a bit, but I ate it on Saturday, and now I'm finished, so I can do something else, so I can be someone else.

The serenity prayer goes, "God, grant me the serenity to accept the things I cannot change, the courage to change the things, and the wisdom to know the difference." Perhaps it's beautiful because it pairs some of the contrary tropes we here, you know, things like "like attracts like" or "opposites attract."  Well, here's another one of those: sometimes, you have to do what's best for you. Look out for yourself, you're all you've got. Other times, you have to just not be a fucking asshole. As for this one? I'm vegan, deal with it. I don't know my reasons, and they're not anyone's business, including my own. I know I despise being undisciplined, and for reasons I don't totally understand but am sensitive enough to recognize exist, veganism is my opportunity to be a disciplined person.

Yes, it's hard and a little silly and a little irrational, but I'm starting to recognize that there is an element of challenge in it that is actually very attractive to me. I need some brain cycles going into a challenge that I am succeeding at. I'm sure my friends and dates and would-be ice cream partners will be able to put up with a more stubborn, vegan, 12-pounds thinner me, and yes, I'm already smiling because the remaining weight I would like to lose I've already lost. I am now a disciplined person, now I just have to wait about three months (say, a pound a week, just an estimate), and I'll be there. It really *is* that easy.

Spent about ninety bucks at Trader Joe's. I have a big budget for groceries but yep, that was a little over the top. The reason was dried fruits and trail mix, SO much of the stuff. I've decided that since I am now a disciplined person who doesn't eat things containing foreign dairy or egg, I can eat whatever the heck I want without worrying about it, and that menat buying a lot of trail mix. So let's read the ingredients label.  Nut, fruit, corn derivative, corn derivative, cocoa, corn derivative, corn derivative, corn derivative, synthetic preservative, corn derivative.  Okay, vegan enough. Sigh, "manufactured on equipment shared with soy and milk." All right, that's less vegan. The first test of my values. What to do here? Well, I allowed it.

I do have some distaste for processed foods because I've come to feel food should pass the "what is" test. If you know what it is, you can eat it. For instance, beef might be horse, so you can't eat it. And chicken nugget might disgust you if you find out exactly what you already know it is, so not that either. But, I'm also not intrinsically enemy to the food industry. I just think we need to renegotiate the terms of their lease on my stomach, because, as of Saturday, as of that last Tim Horton's donut, their lease has expired, and I would like to renegotiate the terms. Trail mix fits in with my health enough that the un-health at the margin I'm willing to trade for the convenience, because as a participant in the modern economy, I am a believer in exchanging money for goods and services (and isn't processed food a service, not a good?) to do things like save me time. So, trail mix is in, and please clean up your equipment, food industry, or else when your next lease on my stomach expires, you may find yourself paying worse rates for less space.

Perhaps some day, perhaps some day soon, the rest of the world will catch up with me. I don't mean all of the world, I just mean the rich organic-conscious world of which I am an impatient consumption-side participant. It's pretty sad that the macarons at Boise Tea have to be made from milk that the baker would have thrown out as spoiled or toxic right away if he or she even saw the health of the cow that produced it.

So, why vegan? Because it's one decision from which my health is a corollary. Because it's the one I have the opportunity to make. Because I disgust myself that I haven't done it yet, because of exactly how little interest I have in consuming the product of sick animals. (And for the record, the "ish" part in "veganishism" is because I will allow on occasion organic or clearly well-raised dairy or egg.) Because when I wish I didn't care about those things, I can practice it anyway, and it can make me a little more resilient than my anger. Because I want to and in life you should treat yourself once in a while. Because as often as I get a chance for an organic or vegan dessert constitutes actual moderation, and not just whatever the heck I've been doing.