---
title: The Firstdate
layout: post
category: general
visibility: public
---

What constitutes a firstdate? As the arbiter of what new-fangled words are okay and as someone who will never give up the fight over the word "literally," I've decided - no, I've arbited! - that the online date, the coffee shop date, the "I texted her asking if she wants to grab coffee sometime three hours ago but she hasn't responded yet" date, is a different enough entity that it really is time we start doing ourselves the courtesy of not sounding like playas for meeting girls or guys at a far slower rate than we did at college or in our hometown. So, I no longer say "I'm going on a date with this girl I met in a coffee shop!" Rather, I just call them firstdates. And, now that I've made up the word firstdate, I will take the winner's privilege of deciding what they are and all the nuances and properties of, and proceed to give lots of advice about them. (That's how the nonfiction book industry works, right?)

Anyway, some linguistic masturbation first: it's a very ideal term to coin since to start using it, all you have to do is stop pronouncing "first date" with the accent pattern with which you pronounce "uh-oh" or "knick knack." Just throw away the word "date." Emphasize that, no no, you're not going on a DATE with this person, you're just going on a FIRST with this person, and whatever it's the first of really isn't important, okay, I guess it's a date, but let's try not to call it that too much. The "FIRSTdate." The "fiiiiiirst<sub>date</sub>."

###So what is a firstdate?

Okay, so what are the defining, or at least relevant, properties of a firstdate? The canonical case is an online date, but meeting someone for drinks after having met in a coffee shop, meeting at a birthday party, etc., all probably constitute firstdates. But this is what I'm getting at:

1. **You don't know each other yet, beyond some evidence that you're each cute and likely personable.**  Online dates end in a lot of flubs since the other party turns out to be not so cute or not have the personality one projected on them, but the more realistic case for an online date is the person is not quite as cute as imagined and sounds a little different, but still cute enough and might turn out to be pretty cool anyway. So, online dates have *that* to deal with too: the additional burden of resolving and salvaging expectations that you had no business having in the first place. Meeting in person, no matter how, rarely has this risk to this. Also, something about pheromones and how you pick your partner exclusively on the basis of what they subliminally smell like.

2. **You're likely not going to see each other again unless you meet one-to-one.** Where there's a lot of common network - a mutual good friend instead of a loose "friend-of" chain at a birthday party - then, with regard to this post, your mileage may vary.

3. **It's a date.** At some point, it should be pretty clear that you wouldn't be meeting like this if you weren't both single. Well, single-ish: the value is certainly out there that maybe it's better to get your sexual or emotional needs met over a semi-committed fling with someone, even if you don't particularly feel you have real relationship material, or you are any shade of unsure yet. I don't want to judge that trend one way or the other beyond to acknowledge its presence and make this point: e.g., if at the end of the date your partner says "so I should let you know I'm sort of seeing someone," that doesn't mean he or she wasn't single or it wasn't a date - it means it wasn't a *good* date. But it might have been a good *firstdate*, namely, you got to know each other as well as you were shooting for, and got the information you needed timely and ideally with some enjoyment.

###What makes a good first date?

This is my point in actually writing this piece. I'm doing that thing that nonfiction self-help authors do, where I'm setting forth a new term as if it was and should have been *obvious* all along. But, by now I've realized that going on a firstdate is actually pretty easy and simple and straightforward. Dating is evolving pretty rapidly, and if you'll momentarily humor the viewpoint of a Darwinian society in which the most attractive, best daters are going to be the most successful people in some way, then the people who are going to find the best partners are the ones who figure out how to tease some sense and patterns out of this weird, yet rule-less, etiquette-less, bad-comedy-worthy mess of a firstdate-fest. In particular, I'm going to be describing firstdates that in my opinion have these properties:

1. **You enjoy yourself.** Seriously. This should be fun. Pretty much everything you do in life you can find an Onion article telling you how miserable it is, whether it's your commute, dealing with your boss, dealing with your coworkers, your family, your mortality, your home. But you probably also know a handful of people who love their job, or people who seem to love their kids as much as you would expect, but also aren't particularly bothered by the challenges of them. Dating is one of those things that can immensely drain on you, that can feel like a sisyphean marathon into understanding yourself and what you are looking for in a partner *while ineluctably losing hair or fertility* (yeah, I agree, men have it easier), but some people seem to enjoy anyway, for some reason. Basically, pessimism in areas of life such as work and family and dating is of utility only insofar as that it ensures us that just because things are really hard doesn't mean we're not doing them right anyway, but also remember that if you're someone who enjoys your career, or your home, or your chance to read or clear your head on the subway while the rest of us look like death, then you also can be someone who enjoys dating.

 But, fine. Maybe dating really is some sisyphean struggle, but your *dates* shouldn't be. You should enjoy the beer or cocktail you're having, enjoy the pretty eyes of the person you're spending time with, and if you're not enjoying their pretty eyes enough, then maybe you should find a bar with more demure lighting so you can partake in this simple pleasure. You should enjoy the show you're going to or the food you're eating or the cocktail you're drinking or the life story you're listening to, or the life story you're sharing. And, if you're not enjoying any of these things, then I emphatically assure you, your next step toward a fulfilling relationship is not another date, it's doing something in some other area of your that is in need of more attention.

 And, lastly:  You're gonna have to go on a lot of these. That's really hard if you're not enjoying them.

2. **You get to know someone interesting.** Ideally your worst case goes something like this: you met a cool person and learned something about them, or you learned something about you. Everyone is interesting and everyone has a life story, but yes, particularly when you live in a dense urb, you have to a *lot* of ignoring people that probably have this compelling life stories that will do little for you besides make you late for work, or spend a few dates with someone who's a bad fit. You've sold your date the time, now follow through with your end of the deal and invest the curiosity into the person you are talking to.

3. **You figure out whether to go on another date.**  And, this is, honestly, the arduous part, and one I can't help with too much. But I actually think I'm about to lay out advice for how to go on a firstdate that will reduce the risk of the date going poorly so the only things that can go wrong are, well, your personalities. Ouch. But, this is also ideal - it's the meatiness that you want to get at over the date. It's much better to think "we really didn't get along" than "maybe we would have gotten along if we had more time to talk or were more loosened up." In this post, that's the problem I'm trying to solve and that I believe can be solved.


###Okay, so how do I go on one?

The "how-to" part of the post. Let's start with the weeknight case.

### The Weeknight Date

**At it's heart, the weeknight date is a cheap show and time for drinks.** The show loosens you up so you can skip the first hour of conversation, which is probably awkward, and where the date is going to crash and burn for reasons having little to do with your compatibility. But, let's break this down:

1. **You should pick a cheap show.**  This is a good time to introduce the golden rule of firstdates:  *ahem*, (sorry, I need this in one sentence for bold-ability). **The golden rule of firstdates is "managed expectations."** Enjoyment of something - anything - is first and foremost a function of whether it *exceeded* expectations or failed to meet them, then far after that a function of how good it actually was. When applied to a person, though, there's a second, very important dimension: *people don't like having expectations imposed on them.*

 So, let's say for your firstdate, you buy someone a $40 ticket to a show. At one level, this might be reasonable. At this point you both know you like classical music, and, ohmygosh, famous blind Cliburn-winning Japanese pianist Nobuyuki Tsujii is playing in New York, and, following my rule that firstdates should be enjoyable, you buy tickets and try to play off buying them with a "don't worry about it."

 So how much date did you just unwilling buy off this person for $40? Is she obligated to stay for a drink? Two drinks? (And yes, I've written most of this article gender-neutrally even though men design dates more than women, but now I'm specifically looking at men as culprits here, because you see where I'm going with gender roles). She said "well I'll get next time" because it turns out people don't like receiving more expensive gifts than the situation calls for, did you just *trick* her into committing to a *next time*?

 Conversely, you'd much rather communicate to your date that you are on the same page about low expectations here. A free or $5 show? It shows that you're not falling in love yet. It's good to not fall in love yet.

 **Cheesy shows are great!** Studies, as well as this one random firstdate I had in January, demonstrate that people bond more over things they disliked together than things they did like together. I'm not sure the mechanics of it, but it really does seem to work this way. To be fair, I probably wouldn't say "this show sounds really cheesy, let's go to it!" because now it's not cheesy to you anymore, it's something you want to do. Try, "this might be cheesy, but it sounds interesting." Now you have a very good expectation and distribution of how the show goes - if it's really bad, it's not a failure, it was a calculated risk you took together, and if it's good, then whoa, that's really cool and something to talk about.

2. **Dutch is default.** Don't try to pay unnaturally. The golden rule of paying for your partner, and because this question is particularly married to gender roles let's put gender in it: **you're not *offering* to buy her something, you're *asking* if you can.**  Not that you should treat a girl to dinner on a firstdate (don't), but supposing you were to treat her to an expensive dinner, you've just given her the rather distasteful choice between a really expensive and unplanned eating adventure, and having to let you pay for her. My evidence for this is the fact that a double standard happens inside the man's mind. An expectation is added. I would bet that were you to introspect on a time you said, "don't worry, I'll cover this," with a friend or date or whoever, your expectations did indeed change. If it was your roommate, you just made a very active move toward making finances more casual between the two of you. But essentially, with a date, you're trying to force her into accepting it as a trivial favor, and yet, *you're insisting on it anyway as if it isn't trivial at all.*

 Anyway, once you understand the weight associated with paying, it becomes something you can apply good judgment to doing well. And, sometimes it does make sense to pay.  You buy two tickets at $10/each and give the clerk a $20. This would be a good time to say something like, "I'll get tickets and you get drinks?" In general, finishing a firstdate with an uneven tab of a drink or ticket between you and your date, without any sleazy nonconsensual paying happening along the way, means you're probably going to see each other again. So, don't treat this ritual flippantly.

 And women, who might have felt brushed aside in the above two paragraphs?  All I can really do is apologize on behalf of my half of the species, we're pretty bad at these things. Just try to date better guys, but yes, you're fairly impotent to a guy getting these things or not.

3. **Be clear about time budget early, budget 3 hours, and if your firstdate lasts 4 hours anyway, go on another one.** I emphatically claim that you do the same amount of getting to know someone in the first hour whether it's a show or talking, and the show option is far lower risk, hence I advocate for that. But, you want about 3 hours total. **Treat getting to know your date as a serious undertaking in its own right**. Penciling it in between other things? Then you really shouldn't be doing it. Say you know of this amazing two-and-a-half hour play you think you'd both enjoy, or this great expensive restaurant you want to try and you're willing to foot the bill. In both of those cases you're very much observing my "do something you'll enjoy" rule, but at the expense of another important goal. This isn't quite the time for those things, since you have a date you need to be getting to know a little bit first.

 This serves another function, though. Date says they have to leave by 9 and stays until 10? Good sign. When I think of myself hanging out with my friends, there are very few times any of us has observed a hard constraint if the conversation was just interesting enough. Conversely, if your date leaves early or punctually, congratulations, you just got very valuable information without having to devolve into the texting game. If your date leaves on time but not with an air of punctuality, then I personally would probably give the date the benefit of the doubt and assume she was being honest and ask her out again, depending. Sorry, whether you go on a second date is not exclusively a function of when you leave.

 And also, it's pretty rude to drag time out of someone that you don't know they have. It's that "expectation" thing again.

 Of course, your mileage may vary. I've found that it takes about 3-4 hours for me to have enough openness with someone to feel they're evaluating me for who I am and for me to have a sense of who she is, and it doesn't matter how the first hour is spent, but once you have a feeling for how your conversation arcs go, don't understate this importance.

4. **Friday and Saturday night are only okay if you have definite plans afterward.** Otherwise, you have one of those gosh-darn expectations happening, and that expectation is, of course, sex. In writing this post I obviously feel I have some expertise to offer on having a constructive firstdate. Time-to-sex is not something I consider myself to have expertise in, however, if you're trying to go on a firstdate anything like I'm describing here, you're probably not particularly interested in one night stands either. And, it would behoove you to not put yourself in a situation where sex is a salient possible development with someone who likely as aware but quite possibly nervous because, but could very much like you enough for it to go that way in the non-distant future if your firstdate actually goes well. Perhaps over the course of your time together you'll get this feeling that you could hook up and it could be a great thing for the both of you. I would be very suspicious of that logic, but *even* in this case, with what little sexpertise I have, I'm going to gander that you're likely going to have better chances of that if you don't walk into the evening with a cloud of sexpectation. (I'm on a role here.) In other words, **it would be better to ditch your later plans than not have them.** 

###The Afternoon Date

 Anyway, on to the weekend afternoon date. I'm actually fairly convinced I've laid out a complete formula for the evening date, and anything you do differently is probably going to be for the worse. But there's a lot of ways the afternoon date could go, so I'm going to do something differently and just outline a way of thinking about it that has worked well for me.

 These outings are far more amorphous and intrinsically casual. and much of the time someone easily has 4-6 hours to kill in an afternoon. I feel much less of a need to even say "firstdate" because afternoon dates are clearly not old-fashioned romantic dates already. **The weekend afternoon firstdate can be summed up in two words: serendipitous sitting**. So, let's do this.

1. **Do not start with sitting.** Sitting across from someone and exchanging ideas is really, really awkward for a firstdate, for all the reaosns I suggest going on a show at first. I think a show works more poorly for an afternoon date just because the amorphous time constraints can be used to your advantage more, but I don't think it's a necessarily bad option.

2. **Pick something that you can oscillate between external activity and conversation.** New York has a lot of food fairs. Conversation stiffening up? Go get your next sample of food. Then go sit and eat it. Conversation going well? Food can wait. This rhythm is *really* useful. It works for museums, too, especially ones with interactive exhibits with *sitting*.  New York's transit museum in Brooklyn is one such example, since the interactive exhibit is retired subway cars that invite sitting.

3. **Conversely, avoid aimless walks.** Window shopping on Bedford Ave. is probably not going to cut it, unless you pre-agree to a selection of shops you're interested in checking out. These types of firstdates can just start feeling really ill-planned and waiting for magical serendipity to happen, moreso than in a museum or possibly a park.

4. **Try to have a nice thing to do when you find a place to sit.** Have a snack. Much better to say "let's go there and have our snack" than "let's go there and awkwardly talk to each otehr." Sketching can also work if you are art-inclined and would enjoy someone watching you and making shallow comments. (And I do mean "enjoy," to say "not mind" would not be strong enough.")

Most of this firstdate is simply the cycle of trying to capture serendipity. There will be a moment where you start connecting or opening up to each other or learn something fairly compelling, you just don't know when it happens or how many rounds of learning the basics of someone it's going to take. So a firstdate like this is about giving it a lot of chances to do so.