---
title: How do I talk about my daily life to my mom and dad?
layout: post
category: general
visibility: public
---

My parents sent me a care / birthday package. Among other things, it included some spatulas and a kitchen scale, since I'm going vegan and part of going vegan means getting some precise control over my nutrition. It also included a note from my Dad who for some reason just calling to return my happy birthday call wound up on my procrastination list. He asked what my hobbies are.

I had a funny reaction to that. Reminds me of this time I was at a house party and this guy showed me his bruises from a Thai massage or Brazilian wax or whatever all bragging about it, and after listening to several guys talk about these painful, unpleasant excursions whose benefit was fully lost on me, I just exclaimed, "I don't GET health." But alas, I am in that culture. Hobbies? Fun? *Fun*? I don't do anything fun. Sure I can talk about how *relaxing* tossing a frisbee around or how it was *good* for my mental *health* but the underlying concept going on here certainly isn't fun. And, sure, that's sort of the culture going on around here, and you know what? That's okay. We're in the diaspora of New Yorkers or yuppies or whatever (how am I supposed to know which culture I'm being a part of?), who perhaps may hate every nut and every bolt of our daily lives but love the motion of it all, the lifestyle whose fundamental building blocks simply don't exist where we came from.

So my dad got a subscription to New York magazine. This I thought was actually pretty cool. About a year ago he got a subscription to the Economist when I did, which I didn't think would work out particularly well, and I probably read three issues before I realized my inadequacy as someone who doesn't actually have to think about a global supply chain except when accidentally schmoozing with finance and consulting types. I think NY mag is really intelligent. I know this because every issue or two, I learn something about the life I'm already living. It's like this weird thing where they hired a team of anthropologists to study *my* culture and I get to read about me! But that's kind of my point. It's really, really weird when your perception and mode of living kind of switches from just doing things that are presumably part of culture to some academic somewhere, to intensely caring about the meaning besides whatever it means to be a twentysomething living in New York City.

I mean, it's not just me. There's an entire self-help industry that has grown around this culture-obsessed culture, which is something I realize thanks to NY mag's really cool issue on the topic. But this still leaves open the question:  *What are my hobbies*?  It's not like I don't *have* hobbies. I have lots of hobbies! That just would never be how I think of the things I do around here. Which is why I think it's really cool that my dad got a copy of NY mag.

But, okay, let's go for a middle ground. Let's try writing about my daily life in a way that answers the question, so what is it I actually do up in this joint? while still actually being me.  Okay, cool. Here are some bullet points that hopefully answer that question.

#### So what's actually going on?

* Daily routine is affected a lot by how work is going. In my time here, there have been times I've intensely liked my work and times I've hated it. Right now I pretty much like it and look forward to doing it and think of it when it's over some. So there's little need for me to be doing this amazing fun New Yorky things.  When work is fulfilling, the point of weekdays is mostly just to stay on top of stuff. This means cooking, 

* By the way, a note on cooking. This is something I wasn't doing six months ago. I made the fairly simple value calculation that my time at work was more valuable than my time cooking, but this was simply not working for anything. Cooking and grocery shopping actually serves a function that is pretty astonishing to realize is important: it keeps me busy. Having to go grocery shopping and cook a few times a week keeps life brisk and moving at a clip. It's something I always have to do a little bit, because I've effected the financial and nutritional responsibility in myself that I actually *have* to cook, but can always do a little bit more of, because it's a skill and a hobby and tasty food makes life better. Cooking makes sure I'm moving when I get home. But what is this need to have something to do after the things I "have" to do are finished? Well, it's something that anyone who has experienced depression knows very well. I don't particularly think of cooking as a cure or treatment for depression, but that's precisely because it's effectively curing or treating depression. 

* Dating is and always has been important. My attitude and posture to this has ranged from comically desperate to boisteriously ridiculous to reserved and serious. But no matter the manifestation, I always care about it. I meet women through online dates, currently. This is something I talk about and write about a lot, but doesn't matter, the point is, this is more or less a reasonable, imperfect way to meet people, just like how most ways to meet people are reasonable and imperfect, and it's how I do it currently. So this means more time spent on okcupid than anyone likes to admit, but that's okay because it corrects itself by leading to dates.  

 Ideally I'd like to have a date once a week, possibly on Tuesday or Thursday or Friday, or to go out with one or two friends to something that's kind of like a date. This is where a lot of "hobbies" of mine will happen. Lately I've had been into classical music, follow some theater, and comedy or jazz shows are generally pretty fine.

* Weekends are varied for me now. They're kind of annoying because it's much harder to have regular weekends than weeknights, and I have to put effort during the week to having weekend plans, or I won't. Friday will be one of date, a run with a friend (which positions me to wake up early Saturday), or hanging out with a few friends over board games or a movie. Summer is better for movies, winter is better for performing arts.  

 I try to have plans for at least two nights on a weekend, then hope I can fill the rest up well enough. Sometimes I can, sometimes I can't. This weekend was a lot of 30 Rock and sleeping and some piano, but I met my exercise goals so I feel okay about it.  

 Sunday mornings begin with a group meditation (satsangh) in the city. I have to wake up around 6 AM given commute time. This has ended the era of late Saturday nights for me and I'm trying to have early Saturday mornings too. It's a risky change in my life but I feel it's enabled me to go further with fitness and nutrition, given that I'm at a point on this curve where regularity is only becoming more important.

* I meet a fitness trainer twice a week. At best I get great workouts, at worst it makes sure even at my worst I'm exercising twice a week. It's my biggest expense after rent and food. I often haven't done the exercise necessary on my other days to have good workouts with my trainer. This has changed recently because of my vegan diet (this is a full post in itself, but in a nutshell, I'm going on a somewhat risky diet and don't want to have an irregular workout schedule while I'm adjusting). Sometimes I've told myself fitness is worth the hefty price, other times I've just told myself it's something I do for fun and it's okay if I want to spend my money that way.

* Every few weeks I try to spend time at a particular ashram in New Jersey. Days there are not necessarily profoundly relaxing or refreshing or spiritual or anything like that. But they tend to serve as a reset to get me back on track with meditation, which I have to do often.

* I'm listening to music pretty much all of the time. Songza when at computer, whatever I've downloaded on my phone when on the subway or sometimes when walking.

* There are some things I try to to every day. They include exercise for a half hour, meditate for an hour, sleep early, and make sure I have groceries and food. Writing is important, too.

* Any leftover time is spent on computer in one form. This is kind of bad but kind of okay. Firstly, it's true: it's the default activity that any time I can't add up will go into. But that doesn't mean it's all the same. Most of the time I'm not really into any TV show, but when I am, it's pretty fun to watch one (yes, at computer). I'm usually tangled in a Scrabble game with my friend Tim, which most of the time is a pretty good thing going on for me. It's fun, engages me analytically and invests in our friendship in a way that works pretty darn well for the time we have.  

 My true default time is spent reading news articles. Like, that's the actual thing I do when I'm bored. I flip through Facebook and read through liberal rants on things. I think at first this was a really cool thing for me - just getting my bored time moved into being an informed, intellectually engaged person has made me wonkier. But I've more recently realized this is something of an idol in my life. I caught myself falling into this very shallow, smug feeling for having heard about some current event or knowing something special about it when someone else brings it up. And I kind of noticed that this just depresses me. There are a few world problems I think about a lot, and you know when is a really, really, insanely bad time to be thinking about them? After getting home to my studio apartment, after I stop doing anything constructive or productive or fun, and before I go to bed. That's just asking for trouble. So I try to peel back on this.  

 So, a lot of my weekdays add up pretty well. I commute, ideally somewhat enjoy a workday, and have enough stuff to do when I get home that I have maybe two hours of idle time (which is a healthy, natural-feeling amount). And lately, you know what I've done when I've had a little too much time? I don't go straight home. I just go sit in a coffee or tea place and have idle time, but a bit better quality idle time. Idle time with a certain ambience, paying a little extra for a tea or coffee in a way that makes me a little more mindful (ha! you knew that buzzword was coming), and in a space I'm more likely to read a book or write a journal entry than I am to read a bunch of news articles on Facebook. This routine has actually kind of worked.  

 This is all a pretty major adaptation from a few years ago. In college I would just hang out in my free time. Board games, or just, you know, hanging out. But my friends nowadays are somewhat geographically disperse (over a 30-60 minute radius) and have rigid enough schedules, like I do, that that rarely works spur of the moment.  

 I've noticed that I feel like playing piano insanely more on weekends than evenings. This kind of bothers me, because with some of the idle evening time, I could be progressing pretty darn well.