---
title: Tasks, 7/11
layout: post
category: tasks
visibility: personal
---

### Tasks that you need to stop putting off

1. Rick - contract
2. PROMYS email
3. Jojo reimbursements
4. Eye doctor
5. Derm
6. Dentist
7. Mail postcard
8. Post office
9. Jojo reply wedding
10. Boxers

### Tasks that you will actually get to doing

1. cats, tuna, Boston, K.
2. Nails.
3. In general square up schedule on Saturday.
4. Scrabble play
5. Pick up more Gatorade
6. Shave
7. Clean everything as usual

### More tasks

1. New loafers
2. New short sleeves
3. Sunglasses

### Groceries

1. Lots of dried fruits for snacks maybe.
2. Cut down on trail mix a lot. Buy far less of it.
3. Cliff bars or something? But try to use these only for workouts. I can see this one getting out of hand. *It may actually be cheaper to buy individually if it means eating less in aggregate.*

### Plan stuff to do

1. Birthday
2. Unlock'd with Lucretia
3. See if possible to get Citizen Cope tickets?
4. Movies - Superman, that one show you were going to see with Crystal
5. Lunch with Kevin?
6. Fuerza Buerta still?
7. Vienna Teng
8. Bobby McFerrin
9. Danil Trifonov tix

### Longer term things to plan

1. Magic show with Crystal/Lucertia?
2. Schiff with Linda & others
3. That one Broadway show Lucretia wanted to see

### Books

1. More Pollan. Much more Pollan.
2. Strunk and White.
3. Emily's girly book about love.

### Schedule

1. ~~Andrew's thing tonight~~
2. Mitha run tomorrow?
3. Birthday something or another
4. ~~Yuna~~
5. Wednesday - meetup
6. Go through Gary's guide and see what's up
7. Cooking and shopping

### Random

1. Suzanne Vega 4 volume collection. Sounds interesting.

### Focus on

1. I have a good set of morning workouts. Want to actually be doing them. I'm also thinking - nutrition is going to be a more demanding topic in my life. Congratulations, I suppose. I almost just think I would rather control exercising regularly out of my workouts and just get it down to nutrition. That means work out every day so I know the only remaining problems are nutritional. But we'll see.
