---
title: Ravel's La Valse
category: reviews
layout: post
---

I thought this would turn out better than it did. Not as cohesive as I was expecting. Could use some discussion to round out what I think I caught in it. So, somewhat unfinished.

Ravel describes the piece with the following introduction:

>Through whirling clouds, waltzing couples may be faintly distinguished. The clouds gradually scatter: one sees at letter A an immense hall peopled with a whirling crowd. The scene is gradually illuminated. The light of the chandeliers bursts forth at the fortissimo letter B. Set in an imperial court, about 1855.

Whatever else you may learn or feel about *La Valse*, this description is a very good place to start. *La Valse* is a beautiful example of the interplay of form and content: it is, at once, a waltz, and the stage of a waltz. The waltz theme does not emerge immediately, yet the listener wants to hear it. So, Ravel gradually clears the clouds and lets the waltz emerge until it finally bursts forth, satisfying the listener's eagerness.

I first heard this piece as part of a Detroit Symphony Orchestra program that featured the work of some early 20th century composers, including Rachmaninoff and Weill.  In Leonard Slatkin's program notes, we learn

>Filled with psychological drama, the work clearly anticipates events  that were to come. The composer denies any relationship to a broken Europe following the First World War, but it is certainly evident that he saw the musical world changing. The fact that he chooses to end this piece not in 3/4 time, the lilting meter that defines a waltz, but with four beats tells us volumes.

The First World War was a coming of age and a loss of innocence for humanity. Times have become more complicated; we cannot simply *go back* to the way things were before, when the collective amount of atrociousness that humanity harbors was perceived and known to be much, much lower. But it's not for lack of desire. To me, it is exactly this yearning that Ravel composes his waltz around. Ravel knows we cannot simply go back to a simpler time and place, but he can tease us and take us back there. Under the hands and wisdom of not only a master composer but a composer with knowledge of the First World War, perhaps we can be brought back to such a state of simplicity.

In listening to this waltz and bringing both my personal experiences and the zeitgeist of the modern era to the experience, I felt the same way. I heard this piece in the middle of May and accordingly had the somewhat fascinating experience of first listening to it in the middle of a spring following a more severe depression than I had experienced before. Perhaps the most obvious symptom of depression is inability to enjoy things one once enjoyed, but I find this description not subtle enough. On the one hand, I do not expect to ever enjoy a video game as much as I did when I was thirteen or sixteen, and I feel conflicted about that. It has been very frustrating to experience moments when I know I should be relaxing and doing something simple to unwind or enjoy myself, and certain video games have come to mind as a way to do it, yet I can't and I know I can't simply step into that particular pleasure. On the other hand, one thing that I have sincerely committed to never enjoying again is the experience of eating meat. As much as I say I may want to return to simpler times before I had what I will just call "knowledge of the world," all I must do is ask myself a simple question: So would you eat meat? To know that I would rather go forward with greater knowledge and maturation and I'd like to say wisdom, at the agreed expense of giving up pleasures I once had.

I mention that I listened to it in spring, because this season, I was acutely aware of exactly how much sunlight there was each day. I found myself saying maybe a dozen times, "I can finally feel light breaking through my mind," and I feel this is exactly how one experience's the waltz - until the dancers burst all the way through, and Ravel reveals his judgment: that, in spite of the loss of innocence, in spite of the fact that one cannot simply jump into a waltz and enjoy it as before, this brilliance still is possible. Hooray. In this piece Ravel gave his audience a piece of coping; he empathized with them, he worked with their difficulty in experiencing a simpler waltz, and then he rewarded them. 

Of course, that's not entirely fair. The ending is dark and sarcastic. Ravel makes his judgment call; that naivety can't really be returned to, for more than a brief daydream. To be frank, ultimately it's a darker piece, and not the best "coping" piece, even if he plays on that feeling. But it's okay, this is also the composer who brought us *Piano Concerto in G.*