---
title: Some notes on BPD
layout: post
category: personal
visibility: personal
---

A few weeks ago, I was diagnosed with bipolar disorder. For the first time in an unfortunately long while, I believe I am working with a skilled therapist. My current therapist is a psychiatrist, which means she can prescribe medications, and I think her background may orient her to a more diagnose-then-treat approach to mental health than psychodynamic or cognitive therapists.

She is not 100% confident in her diagnosis yet, and I believe is at least hinting at me that though plausible, we should remember the diagnosis is tentative. Nonetheless I've found it very easy to acclimate to the diagnosis. It definitely was a big deal when I heard it. I think I could tell because I instinctively reached out to as many people as possible to talk it out and hear their opinions. I think I tend to behave that way when I'm processing new information that I expect to change me more deeply than most facts I acquire in the course of day-to-day life.

It's occurred to me there is of course a certain identity and a culture surrounding bipolar disorder. I intend those words to sound neutral rather than celebrating the condition. I mean, there is also a certain identity and culture surrounding unemployment, which isn't a good thing. Nonetheless, bipolar disorder does imply and necessitate a lifestyle of managing the illness, which I am finding to be an exceptionally ordinary and acceptable sentence, since I've come to believe in having such a mindful lifestyle anyway, in no small part due to the suffering induced by my bipolar disorder. So, since the lifestyle of managing BPD is a mindful one, I am pretty okay with carrying it with some confidence and pride. As for identity, yes, it is in fact an immense relief to see so many pieces of my joys and sufferings tied together by this. This is the first time in a couple years I have seriously believed that anxiety may, actually, be treatable, and that depression may be treatable less rockily. (My bipolar disorder has trained me to believe that depression comes and goes, which for me, it exactly does).

I've thought about how the culture has transmitted itself to me. While I've done a moderate amount of reading on mental health topics, I've known very little of bipolar disorder until meeting with my present therapist. Since then, I've read Kay Jamison's memoir, and read some things on Wikipedia and .gov sites (and avoided WebMD like the plague - I'm already seeing a psychiatrist, so I can do without the fear of being scared into seeing one). A little more interestingly, a friend I have with BPD recommended me an app used to track moods. Now this is more interesting - it has features I wasn't expecting, but presumably many people with BPD find helpful. And even though it's not exactly what I was planning on doing, I find it helpful too, which I think inculcates me into the BPD identity a step further.

So while my therapist is cautioning me against running away with the diagnosis, because it's been so easy to assume the identity and get good results from doing so, I've been haptic with it. Ideally, if I am less responsive to lithium treatment than expected and the evidence for the diagnosis weakens, my psychiatrist will be talented enough to change courses and get me on track. Naturally, one may only hope.

In addition to lithium treatment, which we are ramping up slowly, she has also asked me to track my mood every day, on a scale of -10 to +10. Yes, I am expected to reduce the colorful emotions of a given day to a number on a number line. This is meant to be an easy but nontrivial mental exercise, one that will help me make judgments on how I am doing, assure that I am a capable person of doing exactly that, and give us simple enough data to work with over a period of time.

One might call this mood therapy. I believe this exact tactic is recommended in *Feeling Good*. And, you know what's a little shocking? I even *tried* it once, when dabbling in cognitive therapy. And it of course failed miserably. I was doing this fairly taxing mental exercise - it is far more taxing to track one's mood than the ostensibly few seconds it takes to record it, because it takes a real unit of cognitive bandwidth to pay attention to every day - and expecting results, you know, sometime. Right now? I know it's safe to do because I actually have a real degree of trust in my therapist (how foreign and refreshing), and I know it will be valuable over the long term. Only because of these two conditions am I able to enjoy any short term benefit from it. And I am getting short term benefit from it! I'm learning that some feelings are in fact wrong, and I not only should, but more importantly *can* avoid feeling them. (Specifically, depression, anxiety, irritability - and also, more surprisingly, elevation and giddiness). It's easy for me to be mindful regarding this, because the buck stops at a number from -10 to +10, instead of my mind going in circles of self-analysis that eventually turn into spirals of anxiety before destroying the whole effort. Also, I know not to process a "bad" high or low number as failure, but rather to bring it to my therapist and figure out what to do with that in our treatment. Which, of course, ruins so much of the possibility for anxiety, that alarmingly high or low numbers are rarer than they would otherwise be.

In summary, there is an enormous act of cognitive therapy happening in my mood tracking. But the preconditions for this to be successful are very nontrivial. I have some vague but thus far justified faith in cognitive therapy methods, and seeing how this method is being effective in the context of a full therapy course. Now, my therapy of course includes medication, which in the pop literature is unfortunately demonized as the enemy of any other therapy technique, and the last resort. I think much of the benefits of my therapy thus far I would be attaining without lithium treatment, but if my diagnosis is correct and my psychiatrist's assessment of my condition is correct, these results would all be very flimsy and in just a few weeks or months fail as my moods swing, in the absence of mood-stabilizing medication to underpin it.