---
title: "Chopin's Ballade No. 4: A Memoir"
layout: post
category: general
visibility: public
---

Chopin's Ballade No. 4, recorded by Evgeny Kissin. This marks my actual first time losing it to a classical piano piece, and just bawling my eyes out. Chopin's Ballades - specifically No. 1 and No. 4 - are the first pieces I've listened to, that make more sense to me to describe in the language of emotions from a first-person point of view. The third movement of Beethoven's Moonlight Sonata I like a lot and listen to often, and would describe using words like dramatic, and cool. The effects I acknowledge and I find them compelling. There is tension and suspense, but for me, there are not more basic feelings like happiness or sadness, or more meaningful emotions like triumph or sorrow. But the Ballades, that's all they are. I hear some simpler musical elements that go into them, composed of Chopin's playfulness and rhythm and ornamentation, but those are secondary to the life being lived.

To me, Ballade No. 4 does not even stop at the level of emotions like jubilation or sorrow. There is peace and tranquility, but it's not full tranquility. It's being experienced by someone who is constantly world-weary, and cautious. Perhaps that's a better way to put it: it has cautious tranquility. It has plot, jubilations and triumph. But - and this is where this piece contrasts with the first ballade, to me - these jubilations are not unrestrained, naive or optimistic. They are inevitable and resisted, experienced by someone with a great deal of world-weariness. But as much as he resists, they happen anyway, and awash he goes.

I've heard Ballade No. 4 described as his most complex, difficult and greatest, and perhaps that's drawn me to it much more than I would have been otherwise. Maybe it's all self-fulfilling prophecy (but what isn't?) There's no one to lie to. And, besides, in the climax of the piece, the sobs grew with the triumph. That feeling was real, and I know it couldn't have happened from notes as notes or whatever more basic caricature of music a critic might claim is capable of articulating a piece this beloved. I know it came from the meaning I experienced in the piece, as I experienced it.

And, if that feeling wasn't real, what is?  If the stress and depression I have felt living in New York, with everything right and wrong with it, hasn't been real, then what have I been doing and going through in between? Have I been going through nothing? Postulating that, the question echoes, "Then what have I been going through?" People live lives of intense meaning. If we didn't, action movies wouldn't bother to have plot. Romances wouldn't bother to be any more than pornography. Dramas wouldn't exist at all. But even then, this brain that has been ticking, searching for meaning, searching for a reason the stress is worthwhile, if not in the interest of future jubilations then out of some transcedent, convicted sense of growth. And, insofar as those thoughts constitute my consciousness, or the friend you know, or the writer you find worth reading, or the actor who engages in a career and rents an apartment and goes on dates and is engaging and entertaining or full of ennui depending, and drive the modicum of free will behind all that, they are real.

So, I get this piece. Which is a triumph in itself, of course. Classical music is something I deeply care about. I've liked it a long time, but when I was taking piano lessons as a kid I was far distracted by songbooks from video game scores. Classical music was dry; the fact that you could play real songs I could hear in a real video game was the badge of freedom. I switched from merely liking it to caring about it very seriously over the course of a lot of privilege-guilt. I do not know of a single world-class pianist who is not racially white or Asian, yet I think this blatancy only proves the point that for me, classical music is sacred, special, a thing to do that's right no matter what is going on in the world. I bought an electric piano, in fact. One that I could have easily donated to a school instead, so that dozens or hundreds of children could perhaps experience the sacredness that I decided to apply my financial freedom toward and utilize only some of the time. But, while brooding over this privilege conundrum, I thought, "You know, I would much rather think this over while playing piano," and went through with it. Nothing about my love of classical music came instantly or easily. It emerged as an Archimedean point of freedom and will in my life, something that was so right that my introspection on my exhausted cognitive bandwidth and discipline could not disturb. But, here it is. Some months later, after seeing all of Chopin's Ballades performed live, but feeling too sick-ish to use any word for them besides "dissonant," I remembered the reverence the performer felt toward Ballade No. 4 as expressed in his program notes, and had feelings definite enough to triumph in simultaneously getting the piece and having a glimpse of understanding of what it is "I am going through," not in useful words, but in a recording of a piece to which I can refer you. In my privilege guilt, I have sometimes compared myself to my peers living in places that are ostensibly much scarier than New York. But, I think the feeling of lying awake at night freaking out about death and loneliness is the same wherever you go. Many claim music like this is universal, so, if you want to see how much our lives have in common, perhaps give it a listen, and see how we do.

[Evgeny Kissin playing Ballade No. 4](http://grooveshark.com/s/Ballade+No+4+Op+52/18WzF5?src=5)