---
title: Is a meditation practice psychodynamic or cognitive therapy?
layout: post
category: general
---

Spoiler alert: it's both.

I'm familiar with two models of psychotherapy (and this really needs to be edited by a psychologist before any of this information should be taken in, but on we go). One is psychodynamic, or classical, therapy. I think I said it myself to a psychodynamic therapist I worked with, more or less when I decided to stop working with this therapist: "So it's two steps forward, one step back, but sometimes two steps back, and you can never really tell which way the road is meandering, but presumably it's meandering toward better health, and over seven years of coming here every wednesday perhaps we will have learned and realized a healthier me." So that sounds a lot like *not* receiving psychotherapy.

(Note: In spite of my cynicism, at one point I worked with a very talented psychodynamic therapist, and it was very good for me, and very effective at treating the problems I came in with and contributing to my growth beyond them.)

The alternative is cognitive-based therapy, which among other things, not so much challenges as just ignores the classical postulate that for a patient to become well, the therapist must psychoanalyze deep into neuroses and neurotic patterns and repressions and find the *true* cause of one's suffering, and beneath it, the true self. Instead it simply says, so maybe let's practice thinking differently. Dr. Dan Burns' *Feeling Good* is CBT. In this book he claims that CBT has proven more effective at treating depression than anti-depressants. I take this claim with a grain of salt until I hear it from a less biased author, but I do partake in the optimism.

I recall Zoloft commercials from back when I watched commercials that encouraged a model of the brain, as consisting of a lower level of these pesky chemicals that become imbalanced and make you depressed, and a higher level that is your true self. And of course you would be feeling good and accomplishing great things if it weren't for these chemical imbalances, at a physiological level, outside of your control. So this is a very useful model of the brain if you work in pharmaceutical marketing, but it's ridiculous to think our thoughts don't impact chemical interactions in our brain (because what else are our thoughts?) CBT is based on this premise: retrain your thoughts and you will rearchitect your brain. So how to stop procrastinating, stop worrying, and start living? Ultimatley CBT is a collection of tools and habits to try, some of which might stick, and from which you might build your recovery.

An irony in this is I find the premise and philosophy and even neurology of CBT completely plausible, and given that it makes no greater claim than "It's possible to change how you think and become mentally healthy," it seems like believing it isn't much different from practicing it, from "stepping into" it, if you will. But I believed it and never stepped into it. The habits proposed simply made it to the same to-do list and added to my procrastination and anxiety of things I knew to become better that didn't work. (By the way, the things that did work? Meditate every morning, stop drinking, go vegetarian.) I got in repeated arguments with one friend over this:

"Did you do the exercises?"  
"Well, no, I don't know which to do, I have too many things to be doing to become healthy, I don't know which to start with."  
"Then you can't say it didn't work."
"Well if it did work then I would be doing the exercises."  
"That's just you being lazy."  
"That's the problem this book is supposed to help with!"  

The book proposed habits that could not stick for long enough for me to step into them. Yes, I would try them. Not for the recommended three weeks; it was far too *actually* depressing to devote so much mental energy into reminding myself constantly, "I am so depressed I need to stick with this book's advice or there is no hope." For my particular depression case, this book was very ineffective and bad. Perhaps the premise is something I'm affine to, but it did nothing for me.

But, there was another big problem with CBT to me. This one was more relevant from wheN I was working with a cognitive therapist, before I lost my first job but when I knew that was a thing that was probably going to happen. This is when the anxiety that is realizing life is high risk and scary was very, very new to me and I had no vocabulary or experience or acceptance thereof. So we constantly talked over each other. If I recall, I was never even arguing (like many patients do), "but I have *real* problems." But rather, I was very, very adept at proving I *might* not be okay. And this was unacceptable to me, and something the language and structure of CBT didn't really do much to address.

And it's true, I *might* not be okay. Whatever I do for my mental health now needs to be in harmony with the fact that our planet is suffering and I am going to die some day, and perhaps die after a bout with cancer and a lot of suffering. It needs to be in harmony with the fact that I may be without health insurance as a young person (less likely in the Obamacare era, but I can't call impossible both in practical and theoretical terms), and may not have access to quality mental health care. And I do believe this is theoretically possible, because I believe in, things like, "live in the now," "danger is real; fear is imagined," and so forth. And also because I never lose intellectual awareness of the ridiculousness of turining an "I might not be okay" into "therefore I will be in anguish right now."

What I might actually argue is that CBT has really little to stand on without any "deeper" work. Insofar as the patient is going to run into philosophical disresolution, CBT has an Achilles' heel. I don't know what percentage of, say, Americans would answer yes to the question, "Have you ever lost sleep over thinking of your own mortality?" but I don't think this is the curse of the educated or wealthy; I think when we're not forgetting how hard information literacy is to the poor we're underestimating the fact that most people really do *wonder*, *all* the moreso when they struggle with feeding themselves and keeping their kids in school. But anyone who answers yes to that rather [caricatured question](the onion) I included here has the capacity to drain the efficacy of CBT rather effectively.

I realized that my meditation practice actually pairs these two approaches. Before I started meditating, I knew it was healthy, and I will say that I perceived its healthful effects more as part of the CBT school. It's something you do and practice much like exercise to improve the state of your mind. And scientifically, we know that this is accurate. So I reached out to a friend who I know meditates, and before long I am diving into spiritual literature that looks like nothing other than ridiculous hoke and uses the word "God" far more flippantly than my open but rationalistic mind could really take. That's something of a problem of adopting meditation and yoga practices into Western health and medicine: we can't really divorce it from the spiritual underpinnings.

With all respect to the baggage that the word "spiritual" brings, I would say I practice spirituality and care about my spiritual growth right now. (If this turns you off, then hey, I know what it means to me and I have nothing to prove. Stick around for more blog posts and hopefully I'll get to unpacking what this concept means to me with rigor.) This, I think, plays the role of the psychodynamic approach. It's the feeling that whatever I go through as a human, there is something deeper in me growing also that if I practice with discipline I may experience the reward of coming closer in touch with. It's not unattainable; in fact, that's something that greatly surprised me about every meditation-based spiritual practice I learned of: enlightenment, being in touch with one's spirit, or whatever ideal there is, tends not to be unattainable. c.f. Christianity and Catholicism, what with original sin, the perpetual need for confession and forgiveness, and so forth. And when I more strongly believe this I have the will to practice meditation more deeply.

And when I don't? Well, perhaps every word on spirituality I've learned, is, ridiculous. Perhaps I won't "be okay" and am dealing with the possibility that one day I'll reject all this from my system as hoke-ish poison and put myself into an anxiety attack or otherwise depressive state. Well, that immediately raises the question: what do I do to calm down and stay calm? And the answer to that is, well, meditate, and meditate *more*. That's the CBT side.

So with a meditation practice, they are two wings of the same bird. You need both to fly. You need the "meditation" for daily health and maintenance and staying competent, and the spiritual practice to make sure this meditation is directed and not removed from fear of what life is. You need the meditation to save the spirituality when the spirituality is in doubt.

Anyway, this is a fairly long post and a first attempt at sharing some of my views on consciousness and mental health, but there was one simple point or realization that moved it: my spiritual practice works because it both works at the question of psychodynamic growth and philosophical resolution, and at the level of literal, daily health and functionality. The relations between these two are quite complex, and as I write more I will have much to say on this relation. Sometimes because it's real and informative, and sometimes because it's titillating and fascinating.