---
category: personal
title: Some maxims to live by (and growth)
layout: post
visibility: personal
---

It's a somewhat (very?) hokey title, and the maxims that follow will indeed be hokey. And that's fine - but the reason that it's fine is because they're not just motivational quotes I stumbled on while perusing Facebook, experienced 8 seconds of inspiration from, then promptly forgot about. These are things that when I recall, I have the twinge of the mixed feelings of elation that I know I can achieve a lot just by applying what I already know, and exasperation at the futility of keeping these things somehow at hand, at my fingertips, ready to be called when the moment comes.

So this will be a post that I revisit and modify. Perhaps I won't be able to recall all of these things when needed, but I may be able to recall to draw *focus* to them. In recent weeks I think much of my increased calmness, discipline and overall sense of being well-carried has come from identifying a few principles that have graciously brought themselves to surface. (If you must know, the theme has been "austerity." Good for Dan, bad for Europe?) You see, one of the premises of this blog - why it exists for me, and what I hope readers can get out of it - is that I've maxed out my personal development as far as brilliant new ideas or experiences goes. To some real extent, I do think every important idea in how to live life I've had. This sounds anywhere from arrogant to close-minded to naive, but really, why shouldn't that be the case? I'm 23 as of this writing, which is still pretty young, but it's also just old enough to have some stake in one's long term identity, some conviction that some experiences that will form the core of who one will be in the coming decades have, indeed, happened.

Keep in mind that life being about new experiences is somewhat new.  It was only a generation ago that people my age were already dads with houses and cars and stuff.  But this isn't to say that the alternative to prompt family life is chaos: there are values out there to be captured, defined and lived, not as part of an infinite meander into growth whose best currency to prove itself is how unexpected and nebulous it is, but with some expediency and punctuality.

This is reflected in the lives of the people I admire most, my age and older. This in fact does include people who seem to be doing that "constant new experiences" thing, you know, going to Burning Man, renting a Manhattan one bedroom instead of retiring to Park Slope, that sort of thing. But I don't think that's in spite of consistency. The truth is, if you slip through your twenties and thirties constantly having your mind blown by new ideas and experiences, life is going to seem very chaotic and cruel. That's not growth anymore. That's something else.

I once heard someone whose values I was fond of remark upon her forecoming marriage that she was "finishing growth." There's a sense in which she was right, and I would say that every kind of growth she had imagined thus far, she was finishing. But, I think conversely, if one were capable of predicting and understand the kinds of growth one is about to undergo, then, that's not really growing, in some way. Accumulating, improving, but I prefer a concept of growth that has a stronger infinity than that.

And for me, now it's time to grow in consistency. To rely less on living life at the cusp of one's sense of wonder and imagination, and let habit and focus and a few well-chosen closed doors play their respective parts. So, that being said, here is a piece of what that means to me.

The Maxims
---

1.  It's almost always the right thing to do to sleep early and wake up earlier. Particularly remember when falling into bad sleep habits in the winter, sleeping upwards of 8 hours. That feeling that one should sleep longer really isn't on the right side of things.
2.  Be in touch with how I react to words. There are many, many "anxiety" words. I always will be brooding on something, so it's equally important to remember words that lead to me brooding on healthful ideas for me.
3.  Make sure to leave a few nights a week of alone time or down time.  I need a lot of time to write, time to clean, time to sleep early, and any given night I have about 2 hours of downtime that I'm better off not trying to control.  If I have less than that, I probably won't sleep when I want to.
4.  When in doubt, write.
5.  Food that is bad for me is always wrong. The question is how wrong, but it's much easier to get back to consuming less of it if I don't go through some roundabout justification on the way to mess up. A little chaos is better than a bad theory. Keep in mind, sugar is a stress food.
6.  Meditation is very important to me. If I stop meditating I have little to catch me in another area of life. Sometimes it takes someone else pointing out to me how much better I was at something, back when I was meditating.
7.  Hard workouts feel *really* good after.  All day, the mild awareness of soreness increases focus and comfort existing in own skin. Invest in this. Ideally something both strength-intensive and cardio-intensive, there's a particular intersection worth hitting.
8.  I actually need very little food.  But it's very easy to forget that when I get in a gluttonous mindset.  Same goes for sleep.

