---
title: Almost switched to Google Play's music service. Nope, sticking with Amazon.
layout: post
category: general
visibility: public
---

Amazon gives much more limited music storage than Google does, which is why I almost switched over to Google. Surely I thought Amazon would have to beef up its free storage if it wants to compete evenly with Google - but I learned pretty quickly that Amazon is *aeons* ahead in its service.

1.  Google "google play music." Great. I land on on a page in which I get to pick whether I want the "All Access" package or the "standard" package.  Okay, so I wasn't expecting to be whizzed way back into the year 2003, but that's what happened. I can't use Google's service over the standard workflow without figuring out which package I want. I thought UX was over this.

2.  Okay, fine, literally minutes of assessment later, I decided their standard package covered my needs. I had to read carefully to determine it was an ad-free experience for listening to my *own* music. Like, that's not even something I was worried about until I realized it appeared in the checklist of features I allegedly now needed to evaluate.

3.  Next page - it informs me I'm going to be charged $0.00 now and $7.99 recurring next month for the free selection I just made.  @Google: **What. The. Fuck.**  Was this a *bug*? I literally can't tell.

4.  Anyway, here's the clincher.  **I realized I had no idea how to contact Google about my confusion or experience.**  Amazon customer service is on par with leading B2B client support, and that's saying *a lot.* It's more reminiscent of what Bloomberg offers in their instant chat with help desk. It's better than the best B2B startup services I've used. And I'm just a lowly customer who isn't paying for anything other than the dollar on an MP3 every now and then.

I assumed that if Google decided to enter the market, they would be competitive from day #1.  But whereas Amazon has figured out the competitive advantage in humanized customer service, Google still thinks more free storage is all it takes.  At this point, if Amazon released an email service to compete with Gmail and charged twenty bucks a year, I would switch in a heartbeat.