---
category: general
layout: post
title: Choosing habit over excitement
---

Saturday I woke up at 5:15 AM. Sunday, 6 AM. My greatest fear and aspiration all in one may becoming true: I am a morning person.

See, the problem with this is there is something profoundly unexciting about being a morning person. My Friday and Saturday nights are not marked by adventure and the unknown. I'm not going to have exciting stories that start with getting drunk and end with "and then we made out" when "getting late" starts around 10 or 11 pm. And it's true, I am giving something up. The best morning that starts at 5 I can have is probably going to neither be as fun, stimulating, or memorable as the best night that ends at 5. And I wouldn't even go so far as to say those nights are somehow bad for me and the mornings are all the better. I drink responsiby so that I can make safe decisions that night and not have to reschedule important activities the next day around a surprise hangover. I understand the risks of sex objectively, and do not engage in sex that is unsafe for me. I don't provoke people or risk getting in brawls. It's actually incredibly hard to pinpoint something "wrong" about how and how much I've partied, and in choosing to drastically scale back on this in favor of being a consistent morning person, I honestly must say I am choosing to give something up that in itself there isn't any serious argument was bad for me.

What I'm asserting here is that the best morning compared to the best night is the *wrong* comparison. I am betting serious personal development capital on the fact that I stand far more to gain out of *consistently* waking up early; not simply not drinking but being *someone who* doesn't get drunk, and so forth, than I stand to gain out of the few times getting drunk late opens up new experiences or memories.

A similar argument underpins my vegetarianism. Most of the time I have eaten meat, I have not enjoyed it. It's been lazy and gross, easy and negligent of my health. It happens maybe five times a year that I enjoy a meat eating experience. And those five times a year, I am actively giving up. Never again do I expect to eat Japanese yakitori. There are some restaurants that specalize in this in New York, and they are fun and social, and I've not found any vegetarian-friendly restaurant that comes close to emulating the good spirit and revelry that this style of food encourages. And, that's done for me.

The natural question is, "okay, so why not eat meat sometimes? Make those exceptions when they come?" And the answer is the point I'm looking to make in this blog post: frankly, I have better things to do with my limited mental energy than regulate when those exceptions are and what is okay.

You can be passionate about, maybe four things at any given time. And this is problematic, because there are far more than four pursuits most people want to undertake in life at large, or heck, at any given point. We have limited cognitive bandwidth and mental energy, and identifying this finiteness and working with it is a theme I want to create in all of my writing. To take on a new passion generally means there is an interest you are dropping, so the question happens:  how to grow, under such conditions?

I would say your person, the entity that is who you are, factors into your passions, and your habits. Passions are finite, but habits are infinite; they are the complex tapestry of what we intake over the course of a day or week and how we react. I do mean infinite; the fact that I can complete this blog post menas many mental energies have negotiated themselves into producing a creative energy over an essay-like flow, ignoring many things going on in this coffee shop but enjoying the music playing on my earphones enough to feel good and keep concentrating. Of course, all under the level guidance and stimulation of coffee. (I like coffee.) Loosely, I define a habit as what we do by default, without any interference or judgment or attention or focus needed from our more conscious selves, because the truth is, not terribly much can be focused on by our conscious selves any given time. To experience this, try this exercise: pen and paper, write out everything you'd like to be working on right now. For many of you, this will include fitness goals and career steps, nonfiction books and novels you never got to in high school, and flossing, because most of us should floss more. Anyway, I don't mean to do this exercise for you; those are just some examples to help with the diversity of what I mean for this exercise to cover.

Now underline the ones you have worked on in the last week. Roughly, that is your weekly cognitive bandwidth - the amount of things you succeed at giving focus to in any given week. I have to be really careful in coining this term in the flippant fashion of self-help books. It sounds like I am implying every Sunday you can write your goals for the week and expect success, and I am not; in part, precisely because now the management of your weekly habits is taking up a serious amount of your cognitive bandwidth. Perhaps you have many small and specific things written down and circled, or perhaps you merely wrote "my job" or "my family" and that covers a lot of microcosms. So the number of things is pretty meaingnless, but my point is there is a finitness to it, and this finite nature is worth bearing in mind and respecting. To expect much more output from yourself than what you circled is like suddenly expecting yourself to add 3 miles to your standard jogging route with no changes needed. I guess if that's easy it means you were just being lazy, but I doubt you've been so willfully running under capacity.

Conversely, this isn't actually acceptable. If my daily cognitive bandwidth reveals something like four things, and those four things are exercising, cooking, taking time to write and picking up my apartment, that doesn't leave any time to well, floss. Ouch. I think flossing is a great example, because we all know we should do it, we all believe we will then it comes up, until six months later when the dentist yet again asks us if we floss and, gosh, how *wasn't* that a constant, daily life priority all this time? But this one I've succeeded at making a habit. Dental hygiene is something I am not particularly passionate about nor do I have to devote passion to, but in investing a sliver of my time in improving on flossing, I am now physically annoyed when I have a piece of food stuck in my teeth and I notice I grit my teeth a little from the discomfort. I do this even far after a visit to a dentist and weeks after I have made a point of flossing more, yet I will floss, because, totally removed from my active thought processes, is the ability to perceive that discomfort and react to it, totally independently of whether I really care about flossing that day. Of course, it helps to have floss on me, which is why I rather flippantly by dental floss cartridges and have them lying around everywhere and floating in my jacket pockets. This seeming mess just means when I am prompted to floss, I probably can. This averages out to flossing once every two or three days - the goal is one, but I've hacked up a habit to be responsible to fairly frequently instead of when I remember to feel guilty for not flossing.

So, yes. In being vegetarian consistently, I'm saying I would like to never worry about the decision to eat meat again. Sure it's not that trivial but I'm invested enough in the habit I can't *stop* without investing mindfulness, and, once I do, I can list a dozen reasons I'd rather stick with it, half of them drawing straight out of my own health. And a habit like that is much more rewarding than it starts. It forced me to cook, which led to me saving money. Which led to me thinking, gosh, I can probably do well at a budget right now. Now I save a lot more money than I started, and I would owe much of this to a good habit more than a passion.

Anyway, one loose end on an earlier topic. You may have gathered that I've never been someone who parties "a lot." If you are and you my post has seemed antagonizing, then in considering dropping your current routine for a different one, I would say you should think of questions like: is your party lifestyle safe and healthy for you? Do you get more out of it one week than another (can you articulate any growth that's still happening)? Is it taking away from time you would be investing in career, health, relationships or family? Are you getting out of it what you are setting to get out of it? If your introspection gives you a pass on these questions, and I do expect some people who I would admire in health and lifestyle and ambition to answer yes to these things, then by all means, I have no argument.