---
Title: Where does the knowledge go?
layout: post
category: general
visibility: personal
---

Right now, there is a lot of reading I want to do. I want to learn large swathes of computer science, artificial intelligence and complexity. Knowing myself, increased knowledge of these patterns that constitute our consciousnesses and identity will surely begin applying itself to all aspects of my life. There is a meta-cognition that I'm not entirely sure what to do with, always. Similarly, I also want to learn of spirituality and Zen and perhaps certain psychoanalysis, which I'm sure will amount to far hokier and sillier knowledge, but perhaps impact me in a more agreeable way. I also want to read a lot of fiction. I'm currently reading *Speaker for the Dead,* and it has been a delight. On my way to a gathering with a group of people I had not yet met, I felt a layer of my consciousness identifying with Andrew Wiggin, Speaker for the Dead, becoming reserved and cautious in an effort to become more empathetic.

In short, books impact me a lot. I think I can divide my life into maybe four periods of reading thus far. The first was my youth, when books formed my worldview, but not with any particular shock since there was no previous worldview to be overturned. The second was college, when on occasion a book would impact me exactly like that. The largest revolution was in Owen Barfield's *Saving the Appearances,* yet the book's ideas were too complex for me to particularly retain, besides making a big, fat mental note that the bok was somehow revolutionary to my worldview. But during college, the license was to learn as much as possible with abandon. Learning is good, and the fact that in learning one thing I am neglecting to learn another thing was inconvenient, but not particularly troubling.

Phase three is quite recent, and I will call it the news junkie phase. It is of course noble to be well-informed of current events, but I never dealt with the question of whether one can be too informed before living it. I let news flow into me without restraint, and in the contest to be slightly better informed than my Facebook friends, showed signs of success. I won a bet with another wonkish friend that the government would shut down, and it did. Of course, in this period I didn't read any books or learn any new programming technologies. Perhaps being an expert on Washington dysfunction was not the best domain for me to acquire expertise in.

So, I learned to weigh tradeoffs better. I wrote down which projects are most important to me, paid attention to which were being neglected, and rebalanced.

But what's more interesting to me is this new question I've been grappling with. Where does the knowledge go? I feel how acutely so many of these books hit my consciousness, which means I must grapple with the question, which of these books do I *want* to let hit my consciousness? And for the ones that I approve of, where does the knowledge go when I am done with them? The blunt answer is, at present, often forgotten. I've partially remedied this by looking for habits that can become the traces of forgotten knowledge. I don't remember much of Michael Pollan's *Omnivore's Dilemma*, although I am vegan. But this does not work for many things. In reading *Speaker for the Dead*, a book I find to have an underlying message of empathy, is it any particular good if I am only more empathic for the couple weeks it takes me to read the book? I'm more well-read by the standards of this vague contest to be well-read we are all engaged in, but clearly I'm feeling some ennui at said contest. If the most important thing I learned in 2012 was "form over content," or the more business-relevant "process over substance," from *Godel Escher Bach*, was that worthwhile if I forgot it in 2013?

This post is part of a large and still disorganized project on spirituality, mindfulness, career, routine, lifestyle, and technology. Some of those items are more obviously connected than others, but in reading *Godel Escher Bach* and *I Am A Strange Loop*, and meditating regularly while reading those books, I have had a brush with what consciousness is, and believe that how one achieves the mindfulness and control to effect a routine and a mental livelihood is pretty much it. Technology comes into play because I will need digital tools to achieve the organization required to follow through with this. But, right now, I am hesitant to just jump into whatever book, especially ones in the self-help genre, without assessing whether I can make a proper place for them in my life. This is one reason I'm so eager to learn classical music - it's so exciting and somehow relevant to life, but not in such a connected way that it threatens anything.

So, I look back on many books with some regret. I should know more about the history of corn in American agriculture and how it came to dominate than I do now. Michael Pollan should not seem vaguely intelligent, but palpably and articulately brilliant, like he did while I was reading his book. My copy of *Godel Escher Bach* should be full of scribbes. If the philosophical content in *I Am A Strange Loop* was really so urgent to me, then I should have lived in and continued living it, rather than seeing it as a book I can perhaps get to some day in the future.

I feel like these days may be urgently important to the development of my self. I'm treating bipolar disorder for the first time, and perhaps there is increased daylight in my mind, that I am immediately investing back into the question of how to live my own life with conviction and organization, right now. I don't know if that's exactly what I was supposed to do with it. Wasn't I meant to let go and be calm, instead of write about myself again and again and again some more in the breath created?