---
title: Learning to recognize a good fit
layout: post
category: personal
visibility: personal
---

Right now, I'm recovering from some very toxic attitudes toward dating, that unfortunately were mixed in well with a very depressive attitude.

It happens all too often in life that one starts with a perfectly reasonable, healthy attitude, then finds after carrying it a bit - not even exaggerating it or carrying it to an extreme - it becomes very, very toxic. Perhaps this is a phenomenon more typical to bipolar people, because the mood shifts can happen even when the intellectual beliefs, no matter how sound they are, stay the same. How can this belief that was so right and true and benefited me so much so recently, be hurting me so much *now*?

This year I read Meg Jay's *The Defining Decade: Why Your Twenties Matter--And How to Make the Most of Them Now*. The title reeks of clickbait and indeed it's a self help book, but hey, some are good, and this one is written pretty soundly. The message is of course "take your twenties seriously," and not only chastises the hookup culture, but works through some meaningful case studies of how hurtful and unfulfilling that attitude can be, especially compared to even the weaker attempts at stable relationships. It's important to take relationships seriously, and it's important to look for long term ones. I sometimes read [posts like this](https://medium.com/architecting-a-life/cff4161f551c) and not only lap them up, but love embracing the tragedy of them so strongly. To the extent that that's the guy I want to go out and be - someone who takes life seriously, who started taking his health and career seriously a decade before others did. But this is one of those attitudes that began great when I was in an "up" and just turned itself into a perfectionism when I was more down.

If in dating I'm looking for marriage, if that's the goal, then why bother going out with anyone who is less than perfect? This question is, somehow, perfectly logical but patently wrong, and yet emotionally resonated with me for some time. Perhaps not in the way you would think. "Perfect" is too strong a word, I really mean "great." So it's not that every girl would strike me as not perfect and I would be disinterested and lonely. No, what really stung was the fact that every few months I would meet a girl who was in fact that great. Great in her own right and who feels like everything I am looking for. And of course, imperfect, because it would be so wrong to date someone perfect. And meeting a great girl every few months or so does not strike me as too infrequent by the standards of life, except, it totally is, relative to how much mental bandwidth I'm putting into dating (as I said, I go at most a few weeks without worrying about it). Therefore, girls fell into two categories: not great, for whom I could find no way to fake interest in, and great, for whom I would show the giddiness and desperation and lack of confidence that one would expect from a guy on a first date with a soulmate.

If there's one thing I learned in 2012 and forgot in 2013, it's that process matters. "Process over substance," "form over content,", "the message is the meaning" - whichever clichè you prefer. And I guess my point in writing this post is going to say - if I actually had honed my ability to sense a great fit from before we even knew each other well, then I had accordingly stopped paying attention to the process entirely.

I think one thing that's very important in dating is for guy and girl to have a trait in them that strikes the other party as a little awkward and cute. Something that says you're at my level, I get you so you can relax around me and I in turn can relax around you. That's how imperfections should feel, like little cues that say hey, we get along.

So, in bringing myself out of this perfectionism, I'm going to try to be sensitive to that. To the fact that the "great" girls are, likely, exactly the ones I have no business dating. It's the girls' whose value is slightly hidden but have some goofiness or sociability I can click with early on that I might be able to start a relationship with. That being said, yes, it's also important to learn one's dealbreakers and respect them. But for now, the pendulum must come in the other direction.