---
title: High cogency, low cogency
layout: post
category: general
visibility: public
---

Sitting in a Starbucks. All in all it's been what most people would call a "pretty good" few weeks. I went vegan in the beginning of July, which has had an anticipated cascading effect on my nutrition and lifestyle. There was a point it felt a little desperate and challenging, when I realized that the protein target I had for my workouts was simply not tenable off of a strong vegan diet. The solution is a protein shake, and I've embraced the regularity of taking a protein shake every day and working out every day. Body fat came down from 19% to 17.4% over this. I've got some real habits going on.

The other major thing on my mind has been work, and technology and software, software and technology. This is something I haven't felt for a while, so I've decided to embrace it. And I've been really happy with the result.

So that's been my life for a bit.  Vegan and tech.  But I think this is actually a much, much deeper change in my lifestyle or personality than it appears. And I notice this at stranger times:  When trying to write a blog post on something more obtuse or theoretical, like whatever musings I've had about personalities or perceptions or culture recently. Or when trying to reply to an okcupid message from a girl who is, ostensibly, totally my type, and for all the interest I thought there was, there turns out to be simply nothing to write about. More to the point, several times this weekend I sat down to do exactly these things, and even though fingers were on the keyboard, writing was simply somehow totally impossible. I would stare for 10 seconds before dawdling off on to some other activity, a little bewildered. On the bright side I watched a lot of 30 Rock. But! When Sunday evening finally rolled around and I started thinking about what needed to be done next at my company, the cogency and coherence were brilliant. All these lists of things that hadn't been resolved were already right there.

It was pretty directly apparent that a lot of cognitive bandwidth that I'm very used to flowing right into my cognitive existence in every which form was going straight into my work. But yet I've been in a pretty good mood through this, and I've found rekindled interest in both my immediate work at hand and ideas and technologies in the startup space in general. This has been overdue, so I'm embracing.

But I don't think that's all of it either. I'm meditating consistently at 6 in the morning, which has been somewhat of a goal for a while and is now being achieved. I'm exercising at 7. For all the thought I usually pour into how to accomplish these rather simple tasks in my life - I'm now actually doing it, with the thought somewhere else entirely.

I think, to some extent, I'm achieving something I've had in sight for a while. I'm getting some of the most important functions in my life out of my head space and into habits that have some existence and livelihoods of their own. I don't like that I've lost a layer of cogency or brilliance in the process, but this is okay for a few reasons: one, it's a pretty healthy ebb and flow and given that life is a long game, one stands more to gain from embracing both both ends of the pendulum instead of clinging to one and scoffing away the other. Secondly, I have strong conviction that the longer growth and cogency and brilliance in me is going to come from things like having consistent nutrition and actually understanding data and artificial intelligence (did I mention a data course was in the work mix?). Thirdly, I've only become stronger in time use recently. Writing out *this* blog post? I don't think this is something I would have been fully capable of creating time for, a week ago. So I'll find a source for introversion.

[This speech](http://6thfloor.blogs.nytimes.com/2013/07/31/george-saunderss-advice-to-graduates/?src=me) has both moved and inspired me greatly. The ability to spin out some opinion on horoscopes or blogging or whatever, it's all good and important, but I'm pretty confident that the steps I've been taking are going to build my kindness and empathy. So, I'll embrace and commit.
