---
title: Why you need to be on Github to be on the startup scene
layout: post
category: technology
---

I've made the respective transitions from academia (okay, as an undergraduate, but I was pretty "serious" about it) to corporate coding, then corporate coding to a hot young startup.  My first job I got off of my transcript.  My second job, my resume.  My next job, resume will be important too, but portfolio I think will be the bigger factor.  And, honestly, **I wouldn't want to work for someone who hires me off of a resume and an interview alone.**  Portfolio, that being the sum of software projects and blog posts and whatever else I manage to get into some perusable form, is where my *real* interesting growth as a software developer happens. To be fair, I think there are many, many great jobs - hey, such as my first two - that one can get off of transcript or resume.  But there are many great, even more fascinating jobs that one can get only by virtue of strong portfolio. So I'm writing this post largely with my peers in graduate school in mind; so that when they receive their Ph.D. and try to work somewhere in the city that isn't Wall Street or big tech, they have what they need to make an awesome job happen.

##Resumes are out. Github is in.

Let's start with the basics:  What is Github?  Ultimately Github is glorified, socialized source control, but you might not even know what source control is, so let's work through that.

###What is source control?

Most rudimentarily, source control solves this problem:

>thesis.doc
 thesis-backup.doc
 thesis-backup-june-25-.doc
 thesis-backup-june-25-backup.doc.backup

 Rather than a series of backups, you have one file and a series of commits, and it's painless to revert to any old commit when you need to.

 However, the next use case is working on two things at once, which comes up in software much more than essay writing.  Say you have a software system in production, and you're working on a new feature that will take a few weeks to develop.  But you discover a huge problem that takes one line of code and has to be fixed ASAP.  Without source control, you have a Big Problem, because *even* though your lowercase-problem only takes one line of code to solve, you're in the middle of a big mess that absolutely can't go to production.  But *with* source control, you just switch all of your code over to what is in production, do your one-line fix, get it in production, then resume working on your few-week long feature.

So this should be starting to sound useful.  But the next use case is where things get more interesting:  what about two people working on the same thing at the same time?  Or, the heck with two people.  What about hundreds or thousands of people all working on Linux, or Google's search product (which has, yes, hundreds of engineers working on various pieces of it)?  That's something that's simply not possible without source control.

git, svn, cvs, and Mercurial are all popular source control systems.  As far as the startup community goes, it's only a small exaggeration to say git is the only one that matters.  Github is a company that will host your git repositories.  If you're working by yourself on one computer, you don't need Github at all.  git will get you plenty far.  But when you're working on two computers and need a way to keep the code in sync on them, it's helpful to have a centralized server, and given that you personally don't want to manage a server, you use Github.  (Get it?  Git-hub?)

 ### Socialized source control supercharges the startup community

