---
title: Some recipes (Things I Eat)
category: personal
layout: post
visibility: personal
---

####Oatmeal

1. Quick oatmeal.
2. Fresh banana.
3. Trader Joe's jumbo raisin medley. Seriously, this is what bumps it up to being a full blog-worthy meal.
4. Cinnamon.

See? healthy.

####Veggie burgers

1. Frozen patties, obviously.
2. Use either sweet and sour mustard, or spicy brown mustard. Probably fine to try some of the interest mayos.
3. Salsa. Double roasted is fine, garlic is fine. May be interested to try some of the Brooklyn salsas
4. Vegan cheese.  (I try to be vegan and am stricest when cooking for personal meals.)
5. Bread, obviously. Toast it.
6. Hummus - the white bean and basil has worked really well.
7. For a vegetable both sweet crunchy red bell pepper and just basil as a leafy green work spectacularly. Somewhat flavorless without either.

#### Beans and vegetables

Obviously one of the simplest meals possible, I'm still learning how to season this so it comes out okay-tasting.

1.  For beans - black beans seem to have the most neutral flavor. I don't think pinto are as good. Red kidney are quickest and easiest to cook and bring their own flavor.
2.  Brussel sprouts will pull it in the earthier direction, but these cook wonderfully.
3.  Asparagus goes with lemon, but it's hard to pair lemon with a second vegetable. Definitely *not* mushroom.  One of the few vegetables I use that's on the easier side to overcook.
4.  Note mushroom is something of a superfood. Very high protein in particular. Plus I love them.
5.  Spring onions or leeks add a lot of flavor, particularly in the sweeter direction but not too sweet.
6.  Garlic is good but prefer fresh and it's a somewhat annoying amount of work to prepare.

Douse in Sriracha, of course.

Still not sure how to season unfortunately. Can always use red pepper flakes but it's kind of cheating to just make your food spicier.  I kind of like TJ's everyday seasoning but you can't really go overboard since it includes salt.  Trying out Indian spices - smoked paprika and cumin thus far - but have not made a meal I'm happy with quite yet. Perhaps more herbs.

#### Rice, curry and veggies

1.  I've heard that long grain brown rice is the "healhiest." I've been very happy with brown basmati rice though.  It cooks much faster (I think around 20 minutes) and I prefer the flavor or texture more. It's not as tough I don't think, and it seems to do a better job of absorption.
2.  Last time I used green bell pepper, red bell pepper and muhsrooms with TJ's yellow curry sauce.  Worked perfectly.
3.  I used brussel sprouts when that was all I had.  Seemed wrong, but worked.
4.  Broccoli is probably ideal; since it is good at absorbing sauce.

#### Curried lentils

Still kind of learning this one.